# MaterialXMaya

## Description

This module contains code for a sample Maya plug-in which implements Maya surface and texture shading nodes representing MaterialX shaders in Maya's OpenGL viewport (VP2.0). To support this functionality, MaterialX elements are compiled into GLSL code as well as XML shade fragment wrappers required by Maya to integrate the fragments into the final viewport shader.

## Build

To build this plug-in, the `MATERIALX_BUILD_CONTRIB` build flag must be enabled and the respective `MAYA_DEBUG_DIR` and/or `MAYA_RELEASE_DIR` build directory options set. The minimum required Maya version is Maya 2019.

## Maya Nodes

The plug-in defines two Maya nodes: `MaterialXSurfaceNode` and `MaterialXTextureNode`, accessible in Hypershade in the _Surface_ and _2D Textures_ categories, respectively. A new `MaterialXSurfaceNode` can be assigned to a shape via the [Marking Menu](https://knowledge.autodesk.com/support/maya/learn-explore/caas/CloudHelp/cloudhelp/2019/ENU/Maya-LightingShading/files/GUID-D41AF807-F7CB-447E-BACC-7F0867C14E8D-htm.html).

Both node types expose the following attributes:
* `documentFilePath`: the file path to the MaterialX document (an XML file with extension .mtlx);
* `elementPath`: the path to the MaterialX element within the document to generate the shader for;
* `environmentRadianceMap`: the file path to the environment map to use for specular shading, defaults to a texture that ships with the plug-in;
* `environmentIrradianceMap`: the file path to the environment map to use for diffuse shading, defaults to a texture that ships with the plug-in.

Modifying any one of these attributes via GUI or scripting causes the shading node to refresh in the viewport.

## Maya Commands
### `createMaterialXNode`

Creates one or many MaterialX nodes from the supplied MaterialX document. The command accepts the following flags:

```
   -d -documentFilePath  String
```
Required argument: the path to a valid MaterialX document.

```
   -e -elementPath       String
```
If specified, the command tries to create a node for the given element. If the path is invalid or the element is not renderable, the command fails.

If this argument is omitted, the command creates one node per each renderable element found in the document.

```
  -ei -envIrradiance     String
  -er -envRadiance       String
```
Allows to specify environment maps to use for IBL on the created nodes (see the node documentation). Default assets are used if this argument is omitted.

```
   -t -asTexture         on|off
```
If specified, determines the type of nodes to create with this command (`MaterialXSurfaceNode` or `MaterialXTextureNode`). If omitted, the type of nodes to create depends on the type of the MaterialX element (`MaterialXSurfaceNode` for shader refs, `MaterialXTextureNode` otherwise).

```
   -x -ogsXml            String
```
Allows to specify the file path to a Maya XML fragment to use instead of the one auto-generated by MaterialX. For debug purposes only.

### `reloadMaterialXNode`

Reloads the document and refreshes the viewport shader for the MaterialX node with the specified name. Useful in situations when the contents of the document file have changed on disk, e.g. due to editing in LookdevX or an external XML editor.

## MaterialX Libraries

## Limitations

* No DirectX11/HLSL support.
* No support for Maya light sources. Image-based lighting defined by the `environmentRadianceMap` and `environmentIrradianceMap` node attributes is the only type of lighting currently supported.

## Usage

Use of this code is subject to the terms of the Autodesk license agreement provided at the time of installation or download, or which otherwise accompanies this software in either electronic or hard copy form.
